HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
California becomes
a battleground for Hillary
Clinton and Bernie
Sanders, while Donald Trump gets
hit hard
with heightened scrutiny over
Trump University.
Also ahead: A new report shows
music legend
Prince died from an opioid
overdose. How his
death highlights America's
worsening opioid
epidemic.
Plus: In the most expensive
renters market
in the nation, those tired of
living in cramped
San Francisco are pushing for
more housing
at all levels.
SONJA TRAUSS, Bay Area Renters
Federation:
Getting into the Bay Area is
like getting
into a country club. You either
have to have
a lot of money right off the bat
or you have
got to know someone.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Obama
administration
called today for curbs on payday
loans, used
by an estimated 12 million
Americans each
year. The Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau
says they turn into debt traps
with triple-digit
interest rates.
Proposed regulations would
include payment
tests to ensure borrowers can
repay loans
without having to renew them,
and limits on
the number of times lenders can
debit a borrower's
account. Trade groups warn the
restrictions
will kill the industry.
In the presidential race,
Democrat Hillary
Clinton hammered Republican
Donald Trump on
foreign policy, and Trump
answered with a
major endorsement. In a San
Diego speech,
Clinton emphasized her own
experience, and
said Trump's behavior, by
contrast, shows
he is temperamentally unfit to
be commander
in chief.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
This is not someone who should
ever have the
nuclear codes, because it's not
hard to imagine
Donald Trump leading us into a
war just because
somebody got under his very thin
skin.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even as
Clinton was speaking,
Trump won a critical endorsement
from House
Speaker Paul Ryan. Up to now,
the Wisconsin
Republican had declined to take
that step.
Today, he did, writing in The
Janesville Gazette:
"It's no secret that he and I
have our differences,
but the reality is, on the
issues that make
up our agenda, we have more in
common -- more
common ground than
disagreement," he said.
President Obama today urged
graduates at the
U.S. Air Force Academy to engage
with the
world, not pull back. The
commencement address
in Colorado Springs was the last
of his presidency.
He argued the U.S. has the
strongest military
in the world and must not shirk
its role as
a global leader.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
In these uncertain times, it's
tempting sometimes
to pull back, to try to wash our
hands of
conflicts that seem intractable,
let other
countries fend for themselves.
But history teaches, from Pearl
Harbor to
9/11, that oceans alone cannot
protect us.
Hateful ideologies can spark
terror from Boston
to San Bernardino.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Afterward, Mr.
Obama saluted
and shook hands with each of the
812 graduates.
About one-quarter of the class
was female
40 years since women were first
admitted to
the academy. The Air Force
Thunderbirds flew
over the graduation, but a short
time later,
one of them crashed just south
of Colorado
Springs. The pilot ejected
safely, and the
president met briefly with him
before leaving
Colorado.
The Navy's precision air team
also suffered
a crash. One of the Blue Angels'
F/A-18 fighter
jets went down near Nashville,
Tennessee,
as they practiced for an air
show. A local
TV station showed still images
of a fireball
after the crash. Black plumes of
smoke rose
over the scene as the other
members of the
team flew overhead. The fate of
the pilot
was unclear.
In Texas, a new round of storms
dumped even
more rain today, and made record
flooding
even worse. A flash flood
warning went up
across Central Texas, with
disasters now declared
in 31 counties. Swollen rivers
threatened
to force additional evacuations
from low-lying
areas. The flooding has reached
levels not
seen in more than 100 years.
Parts of Europe are underwater
from some of
the worst flooding in a century
there. Rivers
are out of their banks in
France, Germany
and Belgium, killing six people
and forcing
evacuations. The waters are
rising so fast
on the Seine in Paris that the
famed Louvre
museum announced it will close
tomorrow, so
workers can move art works to
upper floors.
And in Germany, floods are
sweeping through
towns in Bavaria. Disaster
relief crews have
started clearing the wreckage,
but more storms
are looming.
German lawmakers declared today
that mass
killings of Armenians by Ottoman
Turks during
World War I was genocide. The
vote came amid
tensions with modern-day Turkey
over migrants
and political repression.
Alex Thomson of Independent
Television News
has our report.
ALEX THOMSON: Armenians dancing
in the streets
outside. Meanwhile: "All those
in favor? All
those against? Abstentions?"
At that point, applause and
polite thank-you
signs from Armenians in the
public gallery
of Germany's Parliament.
Turkey's reaction
immediate, angry and not that
polite, the
prime minister accusing Germany
of an historic
mistake and saying Turkey will
never, ever
accept it.
MAN (through translator): In
Germany, an important
ally for Turkey, the German
Parliament accepted
a motion by the racist Armenian
lobby. There
is no event in our past that
would cause us
to bow down our heads in
embarrassment.
ALEX THOMSON: A
million-and-a-half Armenians
were killed by Turkish Ottoman
forces during
the First World War, an event
widely recognized
as the first genocide of the
20th century
and officially so now by many
countries.
Yet, a century on, Turkey
remains enraged
by the very idea. Speaking on a
visit to Kenya,
Turkey's president said they'd
recalled their
ambassador from Berlin and the
vote could
cause serious damage to
relations between
the two countries, major NATO
allies and countries
who need each other perhaps as
never before
in the grip of Europe's migrant
crisis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Political
leaders in Armenia
praised the German Parliament's
vote.
OPEC failed again today to reach
agreement
on controlling output to push up
prices. Cartel
ministers met in Vienna, but
Saudi Arabia
and Iran remained divided over
freezing or
curbing production. Iran is
pumping more oil,
now that Western sanctions have
been lifted.
Wall Street closed out the week
with modest
gains. The Dow Jones industrial
average was
up about 49 points to close at
17838. The
Nasdaq rose 19 points, and the
S&P 500 added
nearly six.
And organizers of the Summer
Olympics in Brazil
sought to play down a host of
worries today.
They said Rio de Janeiro will be
ready, despite
an economic crisis, the
impeachment of Brazil's
president, construction delays,
and the Zika
virus.
But American cyclist Tejay van
Garderen became
the first athlete to withdraw
from Olympic
consideration, citing Zika. He
said he won't
chance catching the virus and
passing it to
his pregnant wife.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the tightening
Democratic primary in
California; Trump University's
controversial business model;
amid confirmations
of Prince's overdose, a look at
the country's
growing opioid epidemic; and
much more.
As the primary season reaches
its final weeks
of campaigning, all three
candidates are stumping
As the primary season reaches
its final weeks
of campaigning, all three
candidates are stumping
in California, the state with
the largest
delegate haul.
John Yang takes a closer look at
the tightening
race on the Democratic side.
JOHN YANG: Thanks, Hari.
For weeks, Bernie Sanders has
campaigned all
across California, gaining
momentum ahead
of next week's big primary.
That's forced
Hillary Clinton to spend more
time and money
in the Golden State.
For more on that, I'm joined by
Scott Shafer.
He's senior editor for KQED's
California politics
and government desk.
Scott, thanks for being with us.
I know you have been out on the
campaign trail
today. The polls in California
have been all
the over the place, but I think
they seem
to be showing agreement that the
race really
has tightened. What happened?
What's going
on here?
SCOTT SHAFER, KQED: Yes, we have
now four
polls, John, in the last week
that show this
is basically a dead heat.
I think what is happening is
this. California
is a very diverse state. It has
about a quarter
of the electorate are Latino.
It's got a large
-- 10 percent or so
Asian-American voters,
African-American voters, and the
conventional
wisdom has been that those
voters give Hillary
Clinton the kind of firewall,
that they were
reliable Clinton voters.
What we're seeing is, as these
polls have
tightened, Bernie Sanders has
done a really
good job doing outreach to those
communities.
He's ahead with Asian-Americans
in one poll.
He's roughly even with Latinos.
And so that's
why we have seen this race
tighten up so much.
It's really -- they're scrapping
now for every
single vote that's out there.
JOHN YANG: What are the issues
that are helping
him along, helping Sanders make
those inroads
among those communities?
SCOTT SHAFER: Well, I think, you
know, income
inequality has been a big part
of his message,
and California is a very
expensive state.
I know you're going to be
talking more about
that later in the program, and
so it resonates
with folks. There's a lot of
students and
former students here that have
college debt,
student loans that they haven't
paid off.
That's really working to his
advantage.
But I think a lot of it, too, is
-- he's the
hot ticket in town, so to speak.
He's sort
of like the Golden State
Warriors or the San
Jose Sharks. They're now in the
finals. And
even if you weren't following
those teams
during the regular season, now
it's come down
to the finals and you want to
get involved,
you want to go to a game, you
want to be part
of it.
And so I think he is generating
that kind
of excitement. Hillary Clinton
is very familiar
to Californians. She's been on
the ballot
here. She beat Barack Obama here
in 2008.
Her husband won twice in
California. So, he's
a newer personality, and he's
generating a
lot of enthusiasm, especially
among younger
voters.
JOHN YANG: And the polls are
showing that
there are some unusually wide
differences
among the core supporters for
each candidate.
What are the polls showing?
SCOTT SHAFER: Well, there is a
huge generational
divide, John.
You have got voters who are 65
and older 2-1
for Clinton. You have got voters
who are 35,
30 and younger 5-1 for Bernie
Sanders. You
have got Democrats who are
skewing toward
Hillary Clinton. Then you have
got independent
nonpartisan voters, we call them
no-party-preference
voters in California. They're
definitely leaning
toward Bernie Sanders.
And so that's really why turnout
is so important,
because it really depends
exactly on what
the electorate looks like now.
Because we
vote by mail and we have early
voting, two
million people, more than two
million, have
already their ballots.
JOHN YANG: And pollsters have
also been asking
people if they have already
voted who they
voted for. What are they
finding?
SCOTT SHAFER: Well, according to
the Field
Poll, which came out today,
there is definitely
an advantage among people who
have already
voted for Clinton. They prefer
her.
That's not too surprising. Her
voters tend
to be older. They tend to be
reliable, regular
voters. So it's not surprising
that you would
see an advantage to her. Now,
it's always
great for a campaign to get
those votes in
the bank, so you can focus on
the voters who
haven't yet cast their ballots.
But if you look at the larger
electorate,
it's much closer. Independent,
nonpartisan
voters definitely support Bernie
Sanders over
Clinton. And so his challenge
will be getting
those people to the polls, and
they have some
challenges to cast ballots, and
they have
got to overcome those
challenges.
JOHN YANG: Talk about those
challenges. It's
a semi-closed primary. What does
that mean,
and how easy is it for those
no-party-preference
voters to get a Democratic
ballot?
SCOTT SHAFER: So, Republicans
only allowed
registered Republicans to vote
in the primary
here, but Democrats have allowed
these non-partisan,
no-preference-party voters to
come in and
vote in their primary.
If you are one of those voters
and you don't
ask for a Democratic ballot with
Clinton and
Sanders on it, you are going to
get a ballot
where it's blank at the top. And
so you have
had to by May 31 request a
mail-in ballot
for the Democrats. Now, a lot of
people haven't
done that. Some of these are
younger voters,
new voters.
They may open their ballot the
day before
the election and realize, where
is Sanders
and Clinton? They then have to
go to the polling
place and exchange their ballot.
Maybe they
have planned to do that. Maybe
they haven't.
So, in fact, there was a lawsuit
over this
very thing. Sanders supporters
sued two counties
and the state -- secretary of
state in California.
The judge in that case threw it
out. But they
wanted to extend the voter
registration deadline
right up until the election on
June 7. That's
not going to happen, but there
is a fair amount
of confusion.
JOHN YANG: We have got a little
less than
a minute left, Scott.
That's a challenge for the
Sanders voters,
it sounds like, but there has
also been a
surge in new voter registration.
Are there
signs in there that could help
Sanders?
SCOTT SHAFER: There are.
The new registrants or many of
them are young.
Now, you would expect that,
because who registers
to vote? People who are turning
18, people
who have moved to a place and
now they want
to register to vote. So it's not
that surprising.
But, nonetheless, those are the
voters he
needs to turn out. They are also
-- they also
skew Democrats. So that helps
Hillary Clinton.
So, again, that's why not only
getting your
-- getting a ballot into the
hands of these
folks, but getting them to turn
it in on time,
is so important. And it is --
like I said,
it is a challenge, but they're
very motivated.
The upside for the Sanders
campaign is that
when you look at the polls, his
supporters
are much more excited and
enthused to be voting
than Hillary Clinton's. So you
have to think
that's going to auger well for
him on Election
Day.
JOHN YANG: So, a game of voter
turnout.
Scott Shafer from KQED, thanks
for joining
us.
SCOTT SHAFER: You bet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As he
campaigns for votes,
Donald Trump is also defending
his business
reputation.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports
on the allegations and Trump's
defense of
his business venture Trump
University.
LISA DESJARDINS: This is about
the Trump brand
and the now-defunct business
called Trump
University that relied on the
billionaire's
Donald Trump's real estate
brand, pledging
that students would gain his
knowledge.
Three lawsuits on behalf of some
students
charge it was all a scam. Their
voices are
in this campaign ad from an
anti-Trump conservative
super PAC.
MAN: I spent about $30,000 in
Trump University
and basically all it did was
ruin my credit
and ruin my life. They didn't
really deliver
on anything. Got to remember,
there's 5,000
victims in this. In the end,
there's no there
there.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, though,
a defiant
Donald Trump tweeted that he's
instructed
his execs to reopen Trump
University after
the lawsuits end. New York
Attorney General
Eric Schneiderman is behind one
of those lawsuits,
which could go to trial as early
as this year.
ERIC SCHNEIDERMAN, New York
Attorney General:
It's not a university. We have
all sorts of
rules and regulations to govern
what's allowed
to be called a university and
what's not.
Mr. Trump's role was really as
pitch man.
The president of Trump
University and Trump
himself have both testified
under oath that
he didn't meet the people who
taught the seminar,
so they weren't his handpicked
experts. In
fact, they weren't experts.
LISA DESJARDINS: Two other suits
are pending
in California.
Hundreds of pages of court
documents were
released this week in those
actions, including
the playbooks that Trump
University staffers
used. They refer not to
students, but to buyers
to whom the staff can sell more
seminars costing
up to $35,000 a pop. Maps,
diagrams and detailed
schedules direct salespeople on
how to corral
and convince people, including
those who can't
afford it.
At one point, the document
advises -- quote
-- "Money is never a reason for
not enrolling.
They will find the money."
The documents also contain
searing depositions
from former employees, one
saying that he
was reprimanded for not pushing
a couple to
mortgage their home. To all
this, Trump has
responded that most students
were satisfied,
releasing his own ad of success
stories.
MAN: I wouldn't have been able
to do those
deals without learning Donald
Trump's business
techniques and real estate
strategies, and
I learned them all from Trump
University.
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump insists
he is the victim
of bias by federal Judge Gonzalo
Curiel, who
oversees the class-action suits
in California.
He's the one who ordered the
document release
this week.
But he said yesterday that some
of those documents
should have been withheld.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
What happens is the judge, who
happens to
be, we believe, Mexican, which
is great. I
think that is fine.
LISA DESJARDINS: In fact, Curiel
is of Mexican
descent, but was American-born
in Indiana.
In the middle of all this,
Hillary Clinton,
facing her own e-mail scandal,
hopes to gain
ground.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
He is trying to scam America,
the way he scammed
all those people at Trump U.
LISA DESJARDINS: Voters will
likely decide
on Trump, and his political
brand, before
the courts rule on his business
one. At least
one court trial has been
delayed, at Trump's
request, until after the
election.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We get more on
the controversy
surrounding Trump University
from Tom Hamburger
of The Washington Post.
So, Tom, what are we to make of
the involvement
that Donald Trump had with this
specific company?
He's got his name on lots of
companies all
over the world.
TOM HAMBURGER, The Washington
Post: That's
true. He's become the expert at
branding.
In this particular case, Donald
Trump eventually
owned 93 percent of Trump
University. And
the documents that were released
this week
portray him as really the
marketer in chief
of this company. He's very
active in the marketing
of the program, less active in
doing one of
the things he promised, choosing
the instructors
and going over the curriculum.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Right. So, how
handpicked
were the instructors? That's
part of the sell.
TOM HAMBURGER: Exactly.
One of the claims made in Trump
marketing
material and by Donald Trump
himself in a
marketing video is that he,
Donald Trump,
handpicked the instructors who
were going
to teach basically his secrets
and how to
succeed in real estate.
The realty is that Trump didn't
pick the instructors.
The sort of star, even the
marquee instructors'
names, he didn't know, as
revealed in depositions,
and though he claimed he was
handpicking them,
he was really hands-off.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What do we
know about these
playbooks that Lisa referenced
in her story?
They reference everyone as
buyers, not necessarily
as students.
TOM HAMBURGER: Well, it's quite
clear from
the documents that came through
this weekend
previously that Trump University
was primarily
focused on selling courses to
potential buyers,
to students.
It was all about marketing and
profits. The
-- that is the clearly-stated
priority. It
comes through in these employee
handbooks
or guides known as playbooks
that were released
this week. It's -- sell, sell,
sell is the
-- is what it's all about.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what are
the alumni
of Trump U., Trump University,
whatever they
were called in different states,
how do they
feel about it? What are they
saying?
TOM HAMBURGER: Well, we're
hearing, of course,
from some of those who had paid
money to Trump
University to get trained in the
Donald Trump
real estate techniques were
dissatisfied,
and so dissatisfied that they
filed a couple
of class-action lawsuits, two in
California,
and the attorney general in New
York was impressed
by their complaints and filed a
$40 million
lawsuit in New York.
It's important to add that in
the documents
we saw this week, there were
student evaluations
and individual students who
praised the program.
So it's not entirely unanimous,
but the stories
of complaints of people who feel
they were
defrauded or misled are legion.
And the complaints
they make in the documents we
have seen are
quite strong.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Donald Trump,
as part of
his defense, says, listen, I
have got a lot
of satisfied customers. They
filled out a
survey saying they were
satisfied. They got
what they felt like they paid
for.
TOM HAMBURGER: Exactly right.
And part of the document release
this week
included some of those surveys.
Survey after
survey showed students rating
the courses
that they took and their
instructors at a
five out of five, the highest
possible rating.
There are some who have
criticized the sort
of validity of those surveys,
but they are
there and it's part of the
evidence, part
of the documentary evidence that
was released
by Judge Curiel this week.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What does the
defense team,
what does Trump's team have to
say about this?
Or how do they plan to mount
their defense
in separate legal actions in
different parts
of the country?
TOM HAMBURGER: Well, there are a
couple of
things going on.
Donald Trump spoke out last
Friday in San
Diego against the judge who sits
in the Southern
District of California, Judge
Curiel, and
said -- described him as a
biased guy, said
he's a Donald Trump hater, also
identified
him at one point, as I think
your segment
noted, as a Mexican.
He, in fact, is born in Indiana
and went to
Indiana University Law School.
So part of
it is discrediting the judge.
They suggest
also -- and Donald Trump has
said this, as
has his spokesperson, Hope Hicks
-- they're
confident they will win these
cases. That's
one of the reasons they say they
don't want
to settle. They want to go to
trial, they
have an abundance of satisfied
graduates and
the charges against them, if I
can use the
word, have been trumped up.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
well, no coincidence
that he happens to be on a
monitor right behind
you in your newsroom.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tom Hamburger
joining us
from The Washington Post right
now, thanks
so much.
TOM HAMBURGER: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us,
coming up
on the "NewsHour": the push for
more affordable
housing in one of the nation's
most expensive
cities; a director's cut from
our town hall,
President Obama talks gun
control; new songs
from American classic Judy
Collins; and teenagers
explain why they're always on
their phones.
But first: the opioid epidemic
and the problems
of treatment.
Law enforcement officials told
the Associated
Press and The Minneapolis
Star-Tribune today
that music legend Prince died
from an accidental
opioid overdose in April. The
superstar, according
to reports, self-administered
fentanyl, a
synthetic opioid painkiller much
stronger
than morphine.
It's also been reported that
Prince had an
earlier overdose, and was then
revived with
a dose of a drug called Narcan.
That treatment,
and Prince's later attempt to
get help from
an addiction specialist, have
cast a spotlight
on the question of treatment for
addiction.
Here to discuss this with us is
Dr. Sharon
Stancliff, medical director of
the Harm Reduction
Coalition, a national
organization focusing
on advocacy and the health care
of those struggling
with drug use.
Doctor, when you hear fentanyl,
a fairly strong
drug in all the classes of
drugs, what does
that make you think of what
Prince was going
through?
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF, Harm
Reduction Coalition:
Well, I understand Prince had a
chronic pain
problem, and fentanyl is often
prescribed
either as a patch or
preparations that dissolve
in the mouth for chronic pain.
We don't know if he had a
prescription for
that, but that's extremely
likely. We also
are hearing a lot about fentanyl
in the news
because there is illicitly
manufactured fentanyl
found in many parts of the
country either
mixed into heroin or sold as
heroin.
So, we're hearing about a lot of
fentanyl
overdoses. They could be from
pain management
or they could be from illicit
preparations.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When you see
these stories
and hear about these stories
across the country,
we're seeing, we're hearing more
about people
who get addicted while they're
being treated
for chronic pain.
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF: Right.
Well, anyone who takes an opioid
on a repeated
basis daily will become
dependent upon the
opioid. Many people will be able
to, when
the pain stops, taper off of the
opioid and
go on as though nothing had
happened.
Others find that it's really
hard to taper
off, and once tapered off, they
continue to
have craving for that -- an
opioid for weeks,
months, even years, and so
that's why we have
a variety of medications to
treat opioid addiction
or opioid use disorders.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
things that people
also wonder about is now there
are more first-responders
that have Narcan in the
ambulances and there
are different facilities that
have Narcan.
One of the concerns with the use
of the drug
is that sometimes this almost
gives someone
an insurance policy and it
doesn't necessarily
hit home how close to death they
came with
an overdose when they were
seemingly miraculously
pulled out from it.
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF: Well, the
other choice
might be death in many cases, so
we need that
perspective.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF: But also
getting Narcan,
or naloxone, when you are
actually opioid-dependent
is an extremely unpleasant
event.
I have heard one person
described it as only
slightly better than death.
Someone goes from
completely relaxed, unaware of
their surroundings,
to being in mild to moderate,
even severe
withdrawal. So there's very,
very few people
out there, if any -- there's
somebody in every
bucket, I suppose -- that would
use naloxone
as a safety net in the field.
And, yes, when people are
brought back from
an overdose, whether they are
brought back
by the hospital or the ambulance
services
which have long carried it or by
fellow drug
users or family members, they
kind of miss
the horrifying experience that
-- the person
that thought they were going to
die that really
had the intense experience.
They just wake up feeling really
awful. That
being said, that moment or the
next day is
a good time to approach people
and talk to
them about what just happened
and maybe see
what kind of care or drug
treatment that they
can get.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have in
medicine established
a set of protocols that say, if
you have a
heart attack, here's what we're
going to do,
here's the regimen that we're
going to put
you on, here's how you change
your diet, here's
how you add your exercise. What
do we do when
it comes to drug overdoses?
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF: If it is
somebody that
has actually an opioid use
disorder, that
they're using elicit opioids or
getting opioids
prescriptions outside of
prescriptions, then
we need to treat them for opioid
use disorder.
And the best treatments for that
actually
are giving them medicine on a
regular basis.
We have had methadone in
methadone clinics
for many years, and it has saved
many lives,
prevented many overdoses. And
now we have
a medication called
buprenorphine, which has
several trade names. It's
commonly known as
Suboxone.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even with the
amount of
attention that opioid abuse has
gotten in
the past couple of years, do you
think that
we have an understanding, a
perspective of
the scale of this problem in
America right
now?
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF: I think
some parts of
the country are very much aware
of it.
In Erie County, they're having
so many deaths.
In Massachusetts, they're having
But I don't think that there is
enough of
an investment on the parts of
the governments,
both in funding and in educating
the public
about the importance of
medication as part
of the treatment.
We seem to still sort of
function under this
mythology that most people can
do fine if
they simply go into a detox or a
28-day rehab
and they will come out and they
will be fine.
That's true for some number of
people, but
many people, once you have had a
few relapses,
it really needs to become a
medicalized treatment,
maybe with some counseling or
maybe not.
But I think we need both the
funding and the
impetus put into educating
people about it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Dr. Sharon
Stancliff of
the Harm Reduction Coalition,
thanks for joining
us.
DR. SHARON STANCLIFF: Thank you
very much
for having me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The fight to
build more
housing in an area where prices
are through
HARI SREENIVASAN: The fight to
build more
housing in an area where prices
are through
the roof.
Special correspondent Duarte
Geraldino reports
from the San Francisco Bay Area.
It's part of our weekly Making
Sense series,
which airs every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
MAN: Whose house?
AUDIENCE: Our house!
DUARTE GERALDINO: In the San
Francisco Bay
Area, it seems any small group
of voices can
derail a proposed housing
development.
PROTESTERS: Ed lee, can't you
see we don't
need no luxury?
DUARTE GERALDINO: Some urban
liberals wage
war on so-called luxury housing.
Around here,
the going price for a
two-bedroom is over
four grand a month.
PROTESTERS: No one Bay Area.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Meanwhile,
some suburban
conservatives fight against
subsidized housing.
WOMAN: Stand up for your
property rights before
they get taken away. They want
to take away
your decision of where you're
going to live
and how you're going to live.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But there is a
new and growing
group protesting what it sees as
the not in
my backyard, or NIMBY, attitudes
of both the
left and the right. This group
calls itself
YIMBY, Yes In My Backyard.
WOMAN: Welcome, everybody, to
the rally for
housing.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Sonja Trauss,
hobbled by
a broken foot, is hopping mad
about the lack
of new construction, which she
says is inflating
housing prices throughout the
Bay Area.
SONJA TRAUSS, Bay Area Renters
Federation:
It's caused by zoning, but it's
also caused
by super local control. That's
really what
it is.
DUARTE GERALDINO: And you're
trying to disrupt
that?
SONJA TRAUSS: Yes.
DUARTE GERALDINO: YIMBY groups
are fighting
to ease local development
requirements originally
meant to maximize community
input, but that
today effectively delay new
projects for years,
meaning newcomers have to outbid
existing
residents for a place to live.
SONJA TRAUSS: It's one-for-one
replacement.
Everybody that comes in,
basically, someone
has to leave.
DUARTE GERALDINO: And yet more
people are
coming in.
SONJA TRAUSS: Exactly. There's
more people
that want to live here than we
have space
for. And step one is, make more
space.
DUARTE GERALDINO: A good rule of
thumb is
that, on average, two new jobs
are enough
to justify a new housing unit.
But that hasn't
been the case in San Francisco.
In fact, since
2011, more than a half-million
jobs have been
added to the Bay Area economy,
but only 100,000
new housing units built, one for
every five
new jobs.
SONJA TRAUSS: Getting into the
Bay Area is
like getting into a country
club. You either
have to have a lot of money
right off the
bat or you have got to know
someone.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Now even
Governor Jerry
Brown seems to be siding with
the YIMBYs against
the NIMBYs. He's just introduced
legislation
to simplify the approval process
for new projects
that include at least some
affordable housing.
GOV. JERRY BROWN (D),
California: You're going
to have to reduce some of the
regulatory burdens.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But the YIMBYs
say the governor's
proposal doesn't go far enough.
They would
fast-track new construction at
all levels,
even new luxury housing, betting
more overall
supply will reduce prices across
the board.
SONJA TRAUSS: The goal
ultimately is to have
more housing.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Just more
housing?
SONJA TRAUSS: Just more, yes,
yes.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Anything more?
SONJA TRAUSS: Yes.
NOAH SMITH, Columnist,
Bloomberg: I'm a gentrifier.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Noah Smith
knows some people
consider him part of the
problem.
NOAH SMITH: The city shouldn't
just be a theme
park for young
upper-middle-class people like
me.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Smith is an
economist who
writes for the financial media
firm Bloomberg.
He is also part of the new
creative class
flocking to the Bay Area.
NOAH SMITH: And I am sure that
there is someone
who has it just a little bit
harder to find
housing because I occupy this
place that I
am overpaying for.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Folks like
Smith have pushed
median rent for a one-bedroom in
San Francisco
above $3,600 a month, making
this city, with
all its charm and grit, the most
expensive
rental market in the nation.
JEN PASSETTI, Business Owner: A
studio in
the Tenderloin, which is filled
with drug
addicts and homeless people,
will go for about
$2,200 to $2,800.
DUARTE GERALDINO: In 2013, Jen
Passetti and
her husband opened a mom-and-pop
restaurant
in the Tenderloin district, an
area that's
since been transformed.
JEN PASSETTI: It's insane. The
way the rents
are jumping, I will have to
leave. I can't
afford to stay in San Francisco
at the prices
that are present.
DUARTE GERALDINO: So you're
going to run a
local business, but live way
out, outside?
JEN PASSETTI: I mean, what --
what choice
do you have?
DUARTE GERALDINO: A major
inconvenience for
Passetti, who could soon have a
much longer
commute, but a true hardship for
her kitchen
staff and other blue-collar
workers.
NOAH SMITH: Lower-income people
are involved
in the service economy, and they
prepare food,
they clean houses, they work on
construction
and things like that. And these
require you
to be close to a lot of
customers.
DUARTE GERALDINO: So they're
necessarily local.
NOAH SMITH: They're necessarily
local. That's
right.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Smith reasons,
when lower-income
workers are forced further away
from employment,
travel costs eat away at their
income, adding
to inequality.
GARY MCCOY, Democratic Council
Central Committee
Candidate: I think it's
important to have
housing at all levels.
DUARTE GERALDINO: YIMBY is
supporting Gary
McCoy's run for a seat on the
Democratic Council
Central Committee. McCoy
believes YIMBY's
pro- growth strategy could
reduce homelessness.
GARY MCCOY: I was homeless for
somewhere around
three or four years. The hardest
thing for
me still is very rainy days,
rainy, wet days,
because it brings back, you
know, trying to
find where to go out of the
elements and having
wet socks.
WOMAN: More people are fighting
over fewer
units.
DUARTE GERALDINO: So YIMBY wants
to change
San Francisco's political
structure, but it's
not stopping at the city's
borders.
SONJA TRAUSS: The state spent a
lot of money
on highways, on the BART, and
everywhere that's
on transit that has good access
to jobs really
needs to be built up.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Trauss is
talking about
affluent nearby suburbs like
Lafayette, California,
population 25,000, median home
price, $1.5
million, and just 20 minutes
away from downtown
San Francisco on BART, the Bay
Area rapid
transit system.
In December, Trauss sued
Lafayette, after
it took a parcel that had been
set aside for
315 affordable apartments and
rezoned it for
44 single-family homes.
STEVEN FALK, City Manager,
Lafayette, California:
The parcel that Sonja is talking
about is
located a mile-and-a-half from
the BART station.
So for those people who are
least able to
afford a car, this would be the
worst place
for them to live. But still
Sonja has filed
that lawsuit.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Lafayette City
Manager Steven
Falk points out that more than
500 apartments
and townhouses are being built,
many of them
within a half-mile, walking
distance, from
public transportation.
STEVEN FALK: I think it's an
unfair criticism
to say that Lafayette is not
doing its fair
share.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Her belief is,
by in any
way restricting development so
that more units
are not thrown into the market,
you are by
default contributing to prices
raising. You
don't believe that's the case?
STEVEN FALK: Coming out of that
so-called
great recession, there were
thousands of homes
in my county, not hundreds,
that could not find a renter or
a buyer. Are
we willing to despoil our
natural and wild
places for what we know is a
temporary economic
phenomenon? I think the answer
should be no.
MICHAEL GRIFFITHS, San
Francisco: This will
be a tract development right up
to the road.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Michael
Griffiths agrees
with Steven Falk about not
disturbing nature,
but he is a little more extreme.
That's why
he and a group of Lafayette
homeowners are
also suing the city to block the
44-home compromise
development.
MICHAEL GRIFFITHS: Best use is
open space
for all, recreational use, enjoy
the view
of the magical Mount Diablo.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Are you
opposed to development?
MICHAEL GRIFFITHS: No. But we
feel it's critical
and fundamental that voters who
pay taxes
and live here have the right to
vote on this
important issue.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But Trauss
doesn't believe
anyone should have the right to
vote on and
thereby stall development that
could ease
the housing shortage.
SONJA TRAUSS: We need housing
everywhere,
and we can't allow cities to
just turn down
perfectly good apartment
projects just because
they want empty fields or
single-family homes.
So we might do lawsuits anywhere
in the U.S.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Those lawsuits
could put
a new development a short walk
away from your
backyard.
In San Francisco, Duarte
Geraldino for the
"PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Last night on
the "NewsHour,"
President Obama joined Gwen
Ifill for a wide-ranging
interview and town hall meeting
in Elkhart,
Indiana.
After the broadcast, the
president continued
to take questions from the
audience.
Gun shop owner Doug Rhude
challenged the president's
record on gun control.
DOUG RHUDE, Gun Shop Owner:
Knowing that we
apply common sense to other
issues in our
society, specifically like
holding irresponsible
people accountable for their
actions when
they drink and drive and kill
somebody, and
we do that without restricting
control of
cars and cells phones to the
rest of us, the
good guys, why then do you and
Hillary want
to control and restrict and
limit gun manufacturers,
gun owners and responsible use
of guns and
ammunition to the rest of us,
the good guys,
instead of holding the bad guys
accountable
for their actions?
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
First of all, the notion that I
or Hillary
or Democrats or whoever you want
to choose
are hell-bent on taking away
folks' guns is
just not true.
And I don't care how many times
the NRA says
it. I'm about to leave office.
There have
been more guns sold since I have
been president
than just about any time in U.S.
history.
There are enough guns for every
man, woman
and child in this country.
And at no point have I ever,
ever proposed
confiscating guns from
responsible gun owners.
So it's just not true.
What I have said is precisely
what you suggested,
which is, why don't we treat
this like every
other thing that we use? I just
came from
a meeting today in the Situation
Room in which
I got people who we know have
been on ISIL
Web sites, living here in the
United States,
U.S. citizens, and we're allowed
to put them
on the no-fly list when it comes
to airlines,
but because of the National
Rifle Association,
I cannot prohibit those people
from buying
a gun.
This is somebody who is a known
ISIL sympathizer.
And if he wants to walk in to a
gun store
or a gun show right now and buy
as much -- as
many weapons and ammo as he can,
nothing's
prohibiting him from doing that,
even though
the FBI knows who that person
is.
So, sir, I just have to say,
respectfully,
that there is a way for us to
have commonsense
gun laws. There is a way for us
to make sure
that lawful, responsible gun
owners like yourself
are able to use them for
sporting, hunting,
protecting yourself, but the
only way we're
going to do that is if we don't
have a situation
in which anything that is
proposed is viewed
as some tyrannical destruction
of the Second
Amendment. And that's how the
issue too often
gets framed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can watch
the entire
town hall with the president,
plus more video
excerpts, on our Web site at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: new
songs from an
American classic.
Jeffrey Brown visited Judy
Collins to hear
a preview of her 51st album
being released
tomorrow, along with a tour with
more than
100 dates.
JEFFREY BROWN: Judy Collins has
been making
beautiful music since the early
1960s, and,
since 1967, writing her own
songs.
In her New York apartment
recently, she played
a new one for us.
JUDY COLLINS, Musician: I really
thought of
myself not as a singer in the
beginning. I
really thought of myself as a
storyteller.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oh, really?
Meaning that it
was all about the story.
JUDY COLLINS: It was.
JEFFREY BROWN: Many years later,
at age 77,
the stories and songs continue,
and for her
latest album, titled "Silver
Skies Blue,"
Collins has taken a new step:
co-writing an
entire record with another
artist, 36- year-old
Ari Hest.
Collins grew up in a musical
family. Her father,
blind from age 4, was a singer
and radio host
who inspired her with Irish
ballads, Rodgers
and Hammerstein, and much more.
She studied
classical piano, and then
discovered, and
became part of, a growing folk
music scene
that was infused with social
activism.
JUDY COLLINS: I learned to sing
along the
way. So, the songs provided me
with a living,
with entertainment, education,
singing lessons,
and adventure throughout my
whole career,
really.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the things
that you,
of course, became so well-known
for is bringing
songs that other people wrote to
the attention
of a general audience.
JUDY COLLINS: I was desperate to
sing great
songs, the kind of classic songs
that I had
been raised with. This is the
burgeoning of
the great folk music revival.
And I was in
the village. So I learned Woody
and I learned
Pete. I learned all their great
songs.
And when I came to New York, I
was...
JEFFREY BROWN: Woody Guthrie,
Pete Seeger,
and on and on and on.
JUDY COLLINS: That's right.
I was sitting in the middle of
this incredible
burgeoning of beauty and art and
fantasy,
and also politically and
socially important
songs. I just would walk around
the village,
and Tom Paxton would come along
and say, oh,
hi, I just wrote this song,
bottle of wine,
fruit on the vine. Why don't you
sing it?
Dylan was just starting here in
'61 here in
New York. And I went to hear him
at Town Hall,
and said I have to sing "Masters
of War,"
and I have to sing "The Lonesome
Death of
Hattie Carrol," one of the great
songs to
come out of that era.
JEFFREY BROWN: Over the years,
she'd become
renowned for her versions of
classics such
as "Amazing Grace," sung here at
Dromoland
Castle in Ireland and, at the
Metropolitan
as "Amazing Grace," sung here at
Dromoland
Castle in Ireland and, at the
Metropolitan
Museum, Stephen Sondheim's "Send
in the Clowns."
How do you think of what it is
that you're
doing when it's someone else's
song?
JUDY COLLINS: You have to apply
the same criteria
to the songs that you write, as
well as the
songs that you sing of other
people. They
all have to somehow become --
they have to
become Judy Collins songs.
JEFFREY BROWN: Your song.
JUDY COLLINS: Yes.
You have to make them into that
somehow. And
that's magical, and also which
songs you choose
is magical, because you don't
know what -- it's
falling in love. If you're
falling in love,
you don't know why. I mean,
sure, he has blue
eyes or, sure, he has green
eyes, but you
don't know what it is that
really is the chemistry.
It's the same thing with a song.
JEFFREY BROWN: Can you give me
an example?
JUDY COLLINS: In the early
things, so things
like "Turn, Turn, Turn," of
course. I heard
that and immediately wanted to
sing it my
whole -- ever since I heard it
as a 15-year-old.
JEFFREY BROWN: There's been
great success,
including four gold and two
platinum albums.
But over the years, Collins has
also faced
well-documented challenges,
depression, bulimia,
the suicide of her son, a long
fight with
alcoholism.
JUDY COLLINS: I'm a recovering
alcoholic.
In fact, today is my
anniversary, 38 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: Wow.
JUDY COLLINS: When I have
troubles, I have
been able to go into my music
and my writing
to be able to find my way
through those things.
JEFFREY BROWN: But that, too,
was threatened
when she developed problems with
her vocal
cords that eventually required
surgery.
JUDY COLLINS: It was terrifying.
I spent a
number of years just horrified
with, what
I was going to do if I couldn't
perform?
JEFFREY BROWN: I see you do a
lot of speaking
on the subject of healing, the
healing power
of art and music.
JUDY COLLINS: I do.
I would say that my own life has
been very
impacted by the fact that I'm a
working musician.
So, I'm involved with music,
with writing
it, playing it, practicing it,
performing
it. And it really does -- that
two hours when
I'm on stage is a meditation, in
a way. You
can't do a lot when you're
singing, except
to be present.
JEFFREY BROWN: Still on stage,
Judy Collins
and her new musical partner Ari
Hest are now
in the midst of a national tour.
From New York, I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: to
another in our
Brief But Spectacular series.
This week, we
HARI SREENIVASAN: Next: to
another in our
Brief But Spectacular series.
This week, we
asked a handful of
eighth-graders from a public
school in Los Angeles about
technology, what
they use, and whether they could
survive without
it.
STUDENT: No, I do not use
Facebook.
STUDENT: I know it as, like, a
parent social
media kind of thing.
STUDENT: Like, my grandma, my
aunts are on
Facebook.
STUDENT: Like, that was the
first thing to
come out, Facebook. It's, like,
after Instagram
and all that came out, we wanted
to get the
newer thing.
STUDENT: I use my phone for
everything.
STUDENT: Instagram and Snapchat.
STUDENT: I either go on Snapchat
or I'm on
Instagram.
STUDENT: I do use Uber.
STUDENT: I'm on Snapchat and
Instagram a lot.
STUDENT: I use Instagram to post
pictures
that I feel, like, pretty
confident about.
STUDENT: I usually get above 100
likes.
STUDENT: I don't know, probably
about 130.
STUDENT: In the 200s.
STUDENT: Maybe like 74.
STUDENT: When a friend doesn't
like my photo,
I'm just like, like my photo.
QUESTION: You tell them to like
it?
STUDENT: Yes.
STUDENT: My mom, sometimes, she
wants me to,
like, go outside and, like, get
some fresh
air.
STUDENT: They are taking away my
chargers.
They say that I'm going to go
crazy because
I spend too much time on my
phone.
STUDENT: You're wasting your
time, frying
your brain on that screen.
STUDENT: Yes, I can imagine
going a few days
without going with technology,
because then
I would just be outside working
out and getting
better at sports.
STUDENT: I really don't think
that I can imagine
a world without technology.
STUDENT: I have got to think
about that. I
don't know what to do then.
STUDENT: My parents are always
like, yes,
when I was growing up, we had to
play outside
and we never had phones.
STUDENT: But I think they were
more close
with their friends and family.
They didn't
have, like, an excuse to be on
their phone
at the dinner table. There was
no phones at
the dinner table.
STUDENT: What does worry me
about technology
is people like cyber-bullying.
STUDENT: People are called names
when they
try to speak their mind.
STUDENT: There's always people
that are going
to hate on you. But you should
just concentrate
on the people that like your
stuff.
QUESTION: Do you know all the
people who are
liking your photo?
STUDENT: I know probably 80 to
90 percent
of the people who are liking my
photos.
STUDENT: Before I have met
somebody, I have
seen their Instagrams and see
how they look
and see how they, like, kind of
act and how
they perceive themselves. And
so, without
that, I really just don't know
how I would,
like, I don't know, see people
or get to know
people.
STUDENT: This is my Brief But
Spectacular
take.
STUDENT: And this is my Brief
But Spectacular
take.
STUDENT: On technology.
STUDENT: On being a teenager.
STUDENT: On what the technology
means to me.
QUESTION: And anything else you
want to say?
STUDENT: Follow me on Instagram.
STUDENT: That was pretty easy.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can find
more Brief
But Spectacular videos online at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
And finally tonight, our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
The Earth Harp is a unique
musical installation
that can turn any architectural
or natural
space into an instrument. We
recently spoke
with its inventor, Malibu-based
William Close,
during a three-week exhibition
at the Kennedy
Center here in Washington, D.C.
WILLIAM CLOSE, Earth Harp: My
name is William
Close. I am an installation
artist and an
instrument inventor.
The Earth Harp, I invented right
around the
turn of the millennium. I
actually mounted
a series of chambers to one side
of a valley,
and I ran strings 1,000 feet
across to the
other side, creating a literal
harp out of
the earth.
The way the Earth
Harp works is, the strings are
going from
the chamber which rests on the
stage, and
they are going out and attaching
into the
architecture of the space that
it inhabits.
At the Kennedy Center, the
strings are going
up and tying into the building
itself and
turning the hall into the
instrument.
You could wear rosin-covered
gloves and run
your hands along the strings and
actually
create what's called a
compression wave. It's
very similar to running your
finger on the
edge of a wine glass. And the
sound is very
symphonic.
Here are the Kennedy Center, it
sounds like
I'm in a cathedral when I play.
It's just
really beautiful. When I play
the Earth Harp,
I'm actually standing inside the
strings,
and so I'm surrounded by all
that vibration
and music, and it's really
fantastic.
I have had the Earth Harp in so
many different
environments. I have strung it
to a mountain
peak. I have strung it to the
top of skyscrapers.
The Earth Harp has been at the
Coliseum in
Rome, where it was strung out to
the Arch
of Constantine.
From the very beginning, when I
developed
the instrument, the Earth Harp
has really
captured people's imagination,
and, also,
it's really validated itself as
a truly functional
musical instrument.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online
right now: Drug-resistant
superbugs are already
an enormous public health
problem. But they're
also a global economic problem.
On our Making
Sense site, a columnist takes a
closer look
at what it could cost us.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose":
retired General
David Petraeus on the challenges
facing Iraqi
and American forces in the new
offensive to
drive ISIS out of the city of
Fallujah.
And two news updates before we
leave you tonight.
The Navy has confirmed the pilot
of the Blue
Angels jet that crashed in
Tennessee was killed.
And, in Texas, three soldiers
are dead and
six are missing after a truck
overturned in
a rain-swollen creek at Fort
Hood.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you. Have a good night.